Anonymous20 Feb 2013, 12:03:00

Textusa,

Thank you for your clarifications.

Sorry for sounding a bit peremptory. It was not my intent. The truth is, I don’t have a strong opinion on this and that is why I asked you.

I think you convinced me that Option A was feasible. I did not need to be convinced that it had some advantages over Option B, yet with some drawbacks.

I guess my main concern arises from: "A body was mandatory to stop looking for accomplices, which was exactly the last thing the BHs wanted". How could they make sure, even with a body, that the police would stop looking for accomplices? If the body had been found in July or August 2007, the police would surely have wondered how they were fooled by the T9 during more than 2 months. I imagine they would have been particularly eager to expose any external help provided to the T9, if only because their own credibility was at stake.

The fact that the body had been hidden for some time, regardless of whether it was destroyed or not, seemed like a serious objection against Option A. That is why I said: "Option A did not look like an option at all". But, you are right, this was an overstatement. The BHs might have figured out a way to just deal with that.

The "nice" thing about Option B is that it would lead the justice to officially endorse the abduction theory, certainly a very appealing outcome to the BHs. But the drawback indeed was: there was no abductor. Well, it was a drawback, but they could deal with that too as they proved able in the following. Before the sniffer dogs, the police had strong suspicion against the T9 but no irrefutable proof, so I would imagine that the neglect theory could stand in a court of law. The McCanns would just need to explain their lies. Something like "we were afraid to lose custody of our twins, there was no checks during dinner" could perhaps do.

Again, I am just thinking loud, not claiming that things happened in one way or another.

Needless to say, you are right in assuming that I am not a believer of the abduction/negligence theory.

Alex
