Anonymous19 Feb 2013, 23:30:00

Textusa,

You have committed yourself to the very tedious task of untangling the skein, and you are doing an impressive job. Bit by bit, the truth is surfacing and I hope your decisive role in this will be duly acknowledged in the future.

There is however one point in your theory that is puzzling me, and I thought that maybe you could clarify it or point me to where in your blog you already did so if I missed it.

What is unclear to me is what you think was the precise goal of the "McCann hunting party 07". To have the McCanns charged - I understand and agree with that - but charged with what exactly? In the summer of 2007, it would seem to me that the BHs could go after the McCanns in two different ways:

* Option A: have the McCanns charged for several crimes including body concealment and false testimonies;

* Option B: have the McCanns charged for child neglect and false testimonies, but no active involvement in Madeleine’s disappearance.

I may be wrong, but I believe that Option A was way too risky for the BHs. The police would not buy that the T9 alone hid the body, if only for a couple of days. A bunch of tourists could not possibly do that without substantial logistic help. The police would look for accomplices. The T9 members might resent being the patsies, they might talk. The amount of damage would be highly unpredictable. Hence, Option A did not look like an option at all. It never did, IMHO.

The BHs may initially have hoped that the Portuguese PJ would be corrupt enough to pick some random pedo from the region and get him to confess that he killed the little girl and destroyed the body, but it soon became clear that this would not happen. Pointing at the McCanns was then arguably their best move to feed the mass hysteria - but they could "only" afford to implement Option B.

For Option B to be successful, however, it did not really matter whether the body could be found or not. That is why I would not invoke the absence of the body as the motive for recalling the "party". Another very good motive came in August 2007, when the sniffer dogs Eddie and Keela trashed Option B in a matter of hours. From that point on, the BHs had no choice but protect the McCanns and generate a maximum amount of clutter around them - starting the "Great Maddie War" you so brilliantly exposed.

As for the SY review, your interpretation as to why it stalled is very plausible, except that I would not rule out the possibility that David Cameron tried to play against the BHs, maybe with the intent to use the review as a political leverage. Who knows, something might magically pop up someday when the timing is right.

Please don't hesitate to correct me.

Best,

Alex
