DO NOT PUBLISH

Hello Textusa,

I am not sure if this comment will bring useful information to you but, just in case you would have overlooked it, I wish to draw your attention to a French nationwide radio programme about the Maddie case which was broadcast on April 27, 2017, by RTL (one of the leading French radio stations). The full podcast lasts about 45 minutes and can be found here:

https://www.rtl.fr/actu/debats-societe/il-y-a-10-ans-la-disparition-de-maddie-7788279123

I don't know whether you understand French in the team, but do assume that you are at least aware of a short English translation of the show that was reproduced on different websites, for instance:

https://jillhavern.forumotion.net/t14053-anne-guedes-professor-of-french-in-the-lisbon-university-luis-de-camoes

Just to disclose some personal information, I am French and have been following your blog for several years. I only came across this RTL radio show 3 months ago, and was very surprised by two aspects that are now disturbing me more in the context of the current discussions on your blog.

First, I was surprised that Anne Guedes was invited to take part in such a mainstream show. She is interviewed on the phone at the end after being introduced as a university professor of French in Lisbon and a blogger passionate about the case. The only way I had heard of Anne Guedes before was through your blog. I was not even aware that she had her own blog (in French) about the case. The interest for the Maddie case is limited in the French-speaking world, so a blog in French is clearly not "the place to be" and I do not expect it to have a large audience. My initial assumption was that the people who prepared the show were aware of Textusa and picked up Anne Guedes for her link with Textusa - that, at least, made some sense to me.

The other fact that surprised me a lot is that, in her interview, she strongly suggested that the McCanns concealed Madeleine's body but was very adamant that they did not get any help from anyone else, not even the T7. I was shocked by how strongly she seemed to feel about this "no help from anyone else" theory. It puzzles me that someone who has been contributing your blog on a regular basis for years could have such a divergent view from what the blog fundamentally believes. I was not expecting this at the time (this has completely changed my perception of Anne's comments ever since). Below is an excerpt (translated by me) of the phone interview of Anne Guedes by the radio presenter, Jacques Pradel.

I have no idea if Anne Guedes has an agenda, or is just being used conveniently by the gang that has recently rallied against you. I have no doubt that you understand all this much better than I do, but wanted to share this information in case it helps.

Translated interview excerpt (at 40:50):

Jacques Pradel: [...] The parents would have had to know the region really well for the police to never find the body. What do you think of this argument?

Anne Guedes: There I do not agree at all. It was one of the prosecutors' questions in the archiving dispatch: how did they get rid of the body? I do not agree at all but do not rely on me, Jacques Pradel, to say on the phone what I think happened to the body.

JP: Ah... it might be better to tell the police then.

AG: I think they were caught in a decision, they made a terrible, terrible choice and they could not go back. They cannot go back.

JP: Neither they nor their friends?... The friend couples were interviewed...

AG: Oh no, their friends are aware of absolutely nothing at all, I absolutely exclude that. They were not even friends. There was one couple of friends, the others were acquaintances.

JP: Okay. So, for you, it is a family drama that took place behind closed doors?

AG: Yes, I think, totally closed doors, yes. I do not think anybody knows anything about it. They may have some suspicion but...

JP: Yes, of course...

AG: There is no complicity, I do not believe that at all, I think it is unlikely... I think they acted in a panic of what had happened and, well, they made a bad choice. You know, it happens in life. And maybe that would have stopped there if they had not told nonsense tales.

JP: For example?

AG: Like that kidnapping story, with an open window, without signs of break-in, really... I won't go into details. If you read my blog...

JP: Well, we will read your blog.

[...]
