Letter to textusa


Hi Textusa, 

I recently came across your Theory by chance. I have been quite interested in the Maddie case for a while (and I did read Amaral's book in 2008) but have only checked the internet occasionally on this topic - and didn't know your blog up to now... better late than never. 

At first, I was fairly convinced by the scenario you proposed but then several objections crossed my mind and I thought I would share them. If you are really seeking the truth, it is reasonable to assume that you are open to discussion. 

1. Your core hypothesis is that the reputation of Gordon Brown was at stake at a particularly bad time. But why then encouraging a massive media exposure of the case? The more journalists around, the more likely someone will dig in the dirt - and promiscuous behavior is the kind of things that cannot remain wholly secret. Would anything be found, some political opponent would be very tempted to exploit it. Part of the British press would be under control, but not the whole international press. So why not simply trying to choke the case? Socratès could certainly help for that. 

2. According to your scenario, only Kate McCann and David Payne are responsible for Maddie's death legally speaking, so they could be the only ones facing criminal prosecution. Why would the others, including Gerry, help covering up *their* murder? One thing is to be involved in a sex scandal, another thing is to be accomplice of murder and evidence destruction. Would Gerry take the lead of a massive cover-up just to protect his wife and keep his reputation clean? On the other hand, his daughter died and he did nothing illegal. I could see him telling a couple of lies to the Police but not beyond that, unless he loves his wife so much he would do anything to get her out of trouble (which doesn't seem to fit his personality, does it?). My gut feeling is that he was more personally involved in Maddie's death. 

3. Your theory does not account for a series of health-related facts that I find very disturbing: the PJ did not find any medicine in Appartment 5A (not even paracetamol...), they were never granted access to Madeleine's medical records, the McCanns looked very tense on TV when they denied sedating their kids... You may argue that these are red herrings. 

If the reputation of a top politician was at stake, it seems to me that the last thing spin doctors would have done is to encourage a massive media exposure of the case in order to minimize the risk that some journalists may dig in the dirt. Clearly, nothing was done to divert the public attention from Maddie's disappearance - actually, the story may well have trashed the all-time world record of the highest media coverage for a missing child. This makes me skeptical about the assumption that the McCanns and their friends might have been part of a swinger network including Gordon Brown or whatever public figure the government was trying to protect. 
